---
title: Pointers
date: 2018-06-09
---


### Address
- There exists one more data type called as "Address Data Type" which is used to store data.
- It has certain limitations in arithmetic operations that can be done with it and it is often represented as a Hex value.
- It behaves much like a real-world address.
- Address of anything is basically its starting address location (address). e.g. Arrays, etc...

### Meaning and Syntax
- `int *ptr = &x;` - This statement creates a variable named "ptr" that stores address (data type) of the integer variable 'x' - ptr is also called a **Pointer**.
- The `*` operator is called a **value at** operator, and another operator `&` is called **address of** operator.
- The above statement is same as writing - `int *ptr = &x;`
- x here can contain any value e.g. `x = 20;`
- We refer to the address `ptr` and value at ptr by `*ptr`.
- There are two ways to define pointers, pick one ans follow throughout your program.

```
int* ptr = x;		// Asterisk with data-type
int *ptr = y;		// Asterisk with pointer name
```

- `int *ptr = x;` or `int *ptr = 10;` will lead to compile-time error because we're trying to assign integer value to a pointer data type.

```
#include<iostream>

using namespace std;

int main()
{
	int x = 10;
	int* ptr = &x;
	cout << ptr;		// will print address of x
	cout << *ptr;		// will print 10
}
```

- **DO NOT** declare pointers (create pointers and leave them without initializing them). `int *ptr;` Doing this will lead to **undefined behaviour** as a garbage address value will be assigned to `ptr` and if it does not lie in our program's allloted address space then the program will crash (Segmentation Fault). 
- **Segmentation Fault** - Whenever we try to access an invalid or unavailable location.
- Contexts of the * symbol - 
	- _Declaration_ - `int *ptr = &x;` 
	- <u>**Dereferencing**</u> - `int *ptr = &x;` 
	- _Multiplication_ - `x * y` 
- Only `0` or `NULL` can be typed as address for a pointer initialization.

### Size of a Pointer
A pointer is just another variable storing the address of others, so no matter what datatype it is pointing to, they are of same size - **ALWAYS**.

### Pointer Arithmetic

- **Addition and Multiplication** - Pointer addition is not valid as the result of the addition is an address that may or may not be valid (Implementation Defined).
- **Division and Modulo** - Not valid.
- **Subtraction** - `ptr2 - ptr1` yields a result specifying how many elements can be accomodated between `ptr2` and `ptr1`, hence only pointers of **same data type** can be substracted.
- **Pointer added with and integer** - `ptr + 10` yields a result that is 10 elements further from the given address (initial value of ptr).

### Pointers and Arrays

```
  int arr[5] = {10, 20, 30, 40, 50};
     cout << arr;     	// arr is address of array, first element address, note that how only the name is enough     
     cout << &arr[0]; 	// address of the first element of array
     cout << &arr;    	// arr is address of ARRAY
     cout << arr[0];  	// arr[0]
     cout << (&arr[3]) - (&arr[0]);		// 2 = (Starting address of 3rd element - Starting address of 0th element)
     cout << &arr[3] - &arr[1];		// 1
```
When refering to the array with its name only e.g. `Arya` insted of `Arya[]`, we are implying that we want address of the array, which is nothing but the address of the first element itself.
If we do `cout << Arya;`, we'll get the address value equal to `cout << Arya[0]`. 

### Pointers and Character Arrays

```
  char carr[5] = "abcd";
  	 cout << carr;		// abcd, will print everything from given address to '\0'
     cout << &carr[2];		// c d
     cout << carr[2];		//	c
     cout << (int*)&carr[2];		// some address of carr[2]
     cout << &carr[3] - &carr[1];		// 2
```
**NOTICE** - `cout` in case `&carr[2]` that the output is `c d`, this is because `cout<<` is designed such that is prints values at addresses fed to it until a `'\0'` is encountered. In `print((int*)&carr[2])` the address get typecasted to a pointer type and hence converts to the address of the second element of the character array.

### Pointers and Functions 
In the below code, the two function definitions are exactly the same, as implicitly, only a pointer to the array is passed to the function definition as they are always passed by reference. 

```
int func2(int* arr){

}
 
int func1(int arr[]){

}
``` 
### Pointer Arrays
`int (*ptr)[10]` represents a pointer array of size 10.
